An Overview of International Slavery
1500-1880
Enslaved people in the American South, mid-19th century.
Slavery has existed throughout recorded human history, on almost every inhabited continent.

Though in this class we are focusing the history of the international slave trade from the 15th century to the 19th century, it is important to note the existence of slavery in earlier centuries.

It is also critical for us to understand that after 1492, slavery in the Americas took on a purely racial characteristic it had never had before.

Main slave-trading routes during the Middle Ages, circa 500 CE to 1400 CE.
The use of a map as a representation of slavery, or more specifically the slave trade, has both strengths and weaknesses. It can display the quantity and movement of enslaved people at that point in time. 

However, the map on the previous slide lacks the ability to interpret the human aspect of the trade. The cartographer seems to equate the human slaves to objects, or trade goods. If it weren’t for the title, we would not know that the red arrows drawn across the ocean actually represent human beings shipped as cargo. 

This lack of detail adds to the dehumanization of the enslaved people.
Captive Africans followed many routes from their homelands to other parts of the world. The following map shows the trans-Atlantic movement of these captives in comparative perspective for the centuries since 1500 only. Estimates of the ocean-borne trade are more robust than are those for the trans-Saharan, Red Sea and Persian Gulf routes, but it is thought that for the period from the end of the Roman Empire, to the year 1900, about the same number of captives crossed the Atlantic as left Africa by all other routes combined.

Animated interactive of the history of the Atlantic slave trade. (slate.com)

Before the Atlantic slave trade began and for two centuries thereafter, some African captives were taken to Europe as well as to the Atlantic islands and between African ports.

 It is hard to get precise estimates of these flows, but they were certainly far smaller than the trans-Atlantic traffic. 

Discussions of the slave trade often focus on the routes and destinations of the slave ships but overlook another very important detail:

Where in Africa did those people come from?
West-Central Africa was the largest regional departure point for captives through most the slave trade era. Regions closer to the Americas and Europe generated a relatively small share of the total carried across the Atlantic. 

Total documented embarkations: 9,371,001 captives


Percent of estimated embarkations: 63.3%

This map summarizes the forcible displacement of enslaved African peoples over a long period. 

Both the Atlantic trade toward the Americas (which was intense for three centuries and is better studied and understood in the US) and the Eastern trade (which was of much longer duration but less well known) are shown on this map.
However, neither the numbers of slaves nor the way this human trafficking evolved over time are represented on this map.
The Caribbean and South America received almost all of the enslaved people arriving in the Americas. Some captives disembarked in Africa rather than the Americas because their trans-Atlantic voyage was diverted as a result of a slave rebellion or, during the era of suppression, because of capture by patrolling naval cruisers. Less than 4 percent disembarked in North America, and only just over 10,000 in Europe.

Total documented disembarkations: 
7,878,500 captives

Percent of estimated disembarkations: 88.5%
What kind of information can you get from reading centuries-old ship logs and manifests?

More than you might think.  These types of records show the names of slave ships, the dates of their sailing, their captains’ names, where they picked up their human cargo, where they landed them in the Americas, and the number of enslaved people carried on each voyage.
These 19th century illustrations depict Arab slavers raiding African villages for captives to sell in the Muslim slave markets on the Red Sea and Indian Ocean ports.

How might pictures such as these be used to present a revisionist view of the slave trade?
A depiction of slavers with a group of captive women and children in East Africa. 

What details of this picture confirm your impressions of the slave trade, or portray 
something about it you had not considered before?
