The Beginnings of European Colonialism
As we discussed last week, Spain and Portugal were the early leaders in European explorations of the world. Because of that, these two countries were also the first to make territorial claims and establish colonies in Africa, Asia, and the Americas.

The process of colonialization developed differently for these two nations, however, because Spain and Portugal had very different national goals and priorities in their extra-territorial expeditions.
What were the differences between Spanish and Portuguese priorities in exploration? A simple answer is that initially  Portugal was intent on establishing and protecting shipping routes and trading ports in Africa and Asia to dominate trade with the East (especially the trade in spices). Spain was more focused on building a territorial empire and establishing Catholicism in those territories. Spain = empire and religion; Portugal = expanding and controlling trade.
For more than a century, Portugal had a clear advantage over Spain in both foreign exploration and trade with Asia. From 1341 to 1492, the Portuguese explored the western coast of Africa and the southern Atlantic while Spain was preoccupied with other problems.

What were those problems, and why was Spain finally able to turn its attention to exploration in 1492? (Hint: it has to do with the event portrayed in the painting at right.)
King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella at Granada in 1492.
For a century and a half before Columbus’ voyage to the Americas, Portugal dominated the sea routes along the South Atlantic down the western coast of Africa. The Spanish “discovery” of the New World propelled Portuguese efforts to expand their control of eastern trade routes into the Indian Ocean and Asia.
When Vasco da Gama arrived in East Africa and India on his first voyage in 1498, he was not entering a cultural vacuum or a region with no experience of foreign trade.

The entire Indian Ocean region had been trading with Islamic merchants from Arabia and China for centuries and Greek and Roman traders a thousand years before them. 

Frequently, the peoples of Arabia and India knew more about Europeans than Europeans knew about them.
When the Portuguese arrived in the Indian Ocean in the early 16th century, they found a system of international maritime trade that had existed for hundreds of years, involving mercantile exchange between eastern Africa, Arabia, India, China, and the islands of Southeast Asia.
16th century Aztec drawing showing people infected with smallpox.
Following the arrival of Europeans in the Americas, a process began which historians today call the Columbian Exchange. This refers to the transfer of plants, animals, people, precious metals, technologies, diseases, religions, and ideas between the Old World (Europe) and the New World. Some of this was deliberate and intentional; some of it was accidental or unintentional. Some of it had positive effects for both sides; most of it was decidedly one-sided and to the detriment of the native inhabitants of the New World.
A crucial aspect of the Columbian Exchange was the decimation of indigenous populations as they fell victim to imported Old World diseases, and the resulting rise of the trans-Atlantic slave trade as enslaved people from Africa were trafficked to the Americas to replace the native people who had died from imported diseases.

 Some scholars estimate that as many as 85-90 percent of the Native American population may have died between 1492 and 1642, but that number is disputed by some historians. What is not in dispute is the fact that millions of indigenous Americans died of foreign diseases.
Old World to New World

Livestock (Horses, cattle, pigs, cats, bees)

Rice
Wheat
Sugar Cane (originally from India)
Coffee (originally from Arabia)

Enslaved people

Catholicism (Spain and France) 
Protestant Christianity (England and Holland)

Diseases (smallpox, influenza, measles, typhoid fever, yellow fever, tuberculosis, mumps, gonorrhea, etc.)




New World to Old World

Precious metals (Silver, Gold)

Potatoes
Tobacco
Maize (corn)
Chili Peppers
Quinoa
Tomatoes

Turkeys
Guinea pigs
Muscovy ducks

Disease (syphilis)






Columbian Exchange
In Asia and Africa, European contact was largely economic in nature, at least at first. The Portuguese established entrepots at major trading ports on both African coasts and in India in an effort to dominate the trade in spices and silk from China. In time, the English, French, and Dutch also began competing for a foothold in this trade by setting up entrepots of their own, sometimes with the permission of Asian nations and sometimes by the use of military force.
Entrepots, meaning “ports, cities, or trading posts where merchandise may be imported, stored, or traded, usually for further export,” were important developments in European exploration and expansion. These were particularly vital to the Portuguese, whose early voyages were about economic expansion and control of trade routes. 

Over time, the Dutch, French, and English also established entrepots to advance their trading interests. Entrepots were also called “factories” in that era, as the business representatives of European nations were called “factors.”

Entrepots were often the precursors to long-term colonization of the countries where they were located.
Entrepot was a French word, but the concept was not unique to European mercantilism. Islamic traders and Indian kingdoms had established entrepots all over the western and eastern shores of the Indian Ocean centuries earlier. In many cases, one of the first things the Portuguese set out to do when they arrived in the region was to seize control of these existing entrepots and thereby dominate the spice trade in and out of those seaports. 
Dutch East India Trading Company factory in Bengal, India, in 1665.

European Colonialization:

Beginning in the second half of the 15th century, the nations of Europe (in particular Spain, England, Portugal, France, and Holland) dominated the world as colonial powers. By the 19th century Germany and Belgium had joined this infamous fraternity. So, what is colonialism?

Colonialism is "the policy and practice of a power in extending control over weaker peoples or areas.”  Colonialism did not begin with Spain or Portugal. The Phoenicians, Greeks, Romans, and Vikings were all colonizers to varying degrees. The term “Colonialism” is sometimes used interchangeably with “Imperialism,” but they are in fact different things. Imperialism involves the expanse of power by the acquisition of territory, so colonialism is in some ways an expression of imperialism, but imperialism is NOT automatically a result of colonialism, if that makes any sense.

Colonialism is also not the same thing as conquest, though armed conquest is usually a precursor to colonization. One country may temporarily occupy another country as a result of victory in war, but that is not an act of colonization. Colonization is when the occupiers come to stay.  

While colonialism itself was not new in world history, the extent of European colonialism after 1492 was far greater than anything that had ever occurred before anywhere in the world.

There were several driving factors behind colonialism, some of which were the same ones we find in Phoenician colonization 4,000 years ago, or Viking colonization in the Dark Ages. Other factors, however,  were unique to the process of colonization as practiced by European nations after 1492.

National Prestige:  This was a particular trait of European colonization. As one nation gained an empire in the form of overseas territories, neighboring states often felt that it was imperative to their national pride that they also establish colonies. Think of it as competition. This was always an element in the adversarial relationships between Spain and Portugal; Britain and Spain; Britain and France; or Germany and everyone else…  Probably the worst case of European colonization, the Belgian control of the Congo in the 19th century, was the direct result of this sort of “colony-envy,” as we will see later in this class.

Economic Motivations:  This was perhaps the strongest motivation in the colonization process, and it appears in one of two forms. One was when the colonial power wanted the profits that were to be gained in controlling and exploiting the natural resources or trade goods of its colonies. The other economic motivator was that the colonial power could control trade with its colonies, thereby insuring a “captive market” of sorts, where the colony was only allowed to trade with the mother country.

Security Concerns:  This occurred when one country’s activities in a region prompted its enemies to try and exert their own control of the area in order to protect their perceived national interests.  

Religion: This was a factor in Spanish colonialism in every part of the world, and to some degree in the Portuguese and French process. Under this policy, the European powers believed they had a religious duty to convert inhabitants of other lands to the “true faith” of Catholicism.

When Columbus stumbled across America, the subsequent discoveries of indigenous peoples led Spain, an intensely Catholic country, to move beyond pure trade goals to establish lasting colonies that would add to Spain's greatness and spread Catholicism to the New World.

Thus, we can say that the goals of the Spanish conquest were quite different from the Portuguese. Moreover, it would be incorrect to attribute purely mercenary or religious goals to the conquest. The two went hand in hand and produced individuals who both exploited the natives and truly wanted to help them.

Some Europeans had altruistic motives in their activities in the colonies. But are those still legitimate reasons by today’s perspectives?
Spanish friars performing a baptism in Alta California, which was then part of the colony of New Spain (present-day United States).

